=head1 Preface

[ be witty here ]

=head2 Audience

This book is primarily for people who want to learn Perl 6 and have some
experience programming in another programming language. However, no
prior knowledge of Perl is necessary. After working through this book, a
programmer should have a solid grasp of the basics of Perl 6. That means
that they should be able to solve their own problems with Perl 6. This
book is not a comprehensive reference. It is a series of tutorials.

=head2 Perl 6 implementations

Perl 6 is a specification. Any implementation that passes the official
test suite can call itself "Perl 6". There are currently several
implementations at various levels of maturity. All of the code in this
book is tested using the Rakudo implementation of Perl 6.

=head2 Organization of the Book

Each chapter is a mini-tutorial covering some aspect of Perl 6.
Later chapters build on concepts introduced in earlier chapters.
Each chapter contains a sample program in its entirety followed by
prose that explains the code in detail.

=head2 Installing Rakudo

Complete instructions for downloading and installing Rakudo can be found
at http://www.rakudo.org/how-to-get-rakudo

Source code releases are available from
http://github.com/rakudo/rakudo/downloads

A binary release for windows is available from
http://sourceforge.net/projects/parrotwin32/files/


=head2 Executing programs

To run a Perl 6 program with Rakudo, include the install directory in
your system PATH variable and issue a command like:

    $ perl6 hello.pl

If the Rakudo compiler is invoked without an explicit script to run, it
enters a small interactive mode that allows Perl 6 statements to be
executed from the command line. Each line entered is treated as a
separate compilation unit, however (which means that subroutines are
preserved after they are defined, but variables are not).
